[Music]
CTV's w5 how I'm afraid should people be
panicking is not gonna help leading the
fight against a worldwide outbreak
millions of people are now under
quarantine there are more than one
hundred eighteen thousand cases in 114
countries you can't sugarcoat it this is
a dangerous virus and I know for sure
that the world I left behind dead you
gun jailed for life and trying to come
home you can't just put an 18 year old
in jail for life we only want our son's
close enough to be able to see them I
wanted to be able to come home
CTV's w5 with Avery Haynes
sandy Renaldo and Lisa Laflamme
here is Avery Haynes hello and thanks
for joining us every day the news about
the corona virus seems to get worse it's
a pandemic the numbers of those infected
keeps growing
governments are desperately trying to
contain it well there's one man who has
the ear of governments around the world
his name dr. Bruce Aylward he's been
battling dangerous viruses for nearly 30
years he's a Canadian from Newfoundland
and the World Health Organization's lead
investigator in an exclusive interview
with w5 he sat down with us in Geneva
Switzerland to talk about the virus the
pandemic and what's next health
officials in China are working to
contain the outbreak of a new mysterious
type of pneumonia the underlying cause
remains unknown the government is
extremely nervous millions of people are
now under quarantine how deadly is the
virus how contagious is the virus kovat
19 public health enemy number one the
whole world needs to be on alert the
whole world needs to take action the
fast-moving virus has now moved across
Asia how do you stop all of this panic
that's the big question
kovita 19 can be characterized as a pun
to me the Prime Minister's wife has now
tested positive for Kovac 19 this stark
map shows the invasion as red dots
expand into overlapping circles of
coronavirus territory the world is at
war with a virus the life-and-death
quest for answers on how to contain it
lie here inside this building in Geneva
Switzerland the World Health
Organization is tasked with a monumental
job of trying to coordinate an
international response I thought we had
a pretty clear until Italy decided that
they were going to do in this renowned
Canadian doctor a former assistant
director general for the w-h-o plays a
crucial role
no stranger to frightening diseases dr.
Bruce Aylward has spent his career
tackling global health emergencies Ebola
this is a global health security issue
zika polio
you know there's certain mathematics to
infectious disease outbreaks and now
he's the wh o--'s go to dr. fork Ovid 19
we don't shake hands at this point
no and it's more probably too close we
should be a little further the most
important thing is going to be keeping a
little bit of distance like that that's
that ammeter is good right and but even
then we're not directly across from each
other so it's not going to be as big a
risk
dr. Aylward originally from Newfoundland
led an international team right to the
front line of where this all began Wu
Han on a fact-finding mission at the
height of the lockdown in the Chinese
city he has compiled groundbreaking
research on the mysterious disease this
is a virus that spreads right around the
world very very quickly
you can't sugarcoat it this is a
dangerous virus a disease that causes
this kind of societal disruption this
kind of economic devastation this kind
of a human cost this is awful this is
horrible but you spend your life you
know in careers like mine training to be
able to your work in these situations
and be able to help with the United
States banning most travel from Europe
with major league sports suspending
their seasons with a stock market in
freefall dr. Bruce Aylward says the
world needs to unite to fight this
common enemy this is a biologic process
this is a virus and we can predict so
many things but then there's a lot of
chance involved so sometimes we just
don't know why does it take off in what
area easy to blame really unhelpful when
you're in the middle of a war right now
solidarity slow it down shut it down you
describe this as a war and the enemy is
invisible to most of us absolutely I
mean this is a virus and it's a virus
that makes people sick it survives in
human living cells it has to get from
you to you and the key to winning a war
is knowing your enemy's next line of
attack do we know this enemy's next line
of attack when people ask me you know
about the gaps in the knowledge of this
it's it's like how much do you need to
know I mean you're in a war do you need
to know your enemy's postal address what
color underwear they're wearing you know
what they had for dinner last night with
this virus you don't have to know
everything but we're gonna learn more is
it fires ends up unfortunately in other
countries and that's the scary thing is
that that we're learning in real time
and people's lives are on the line yeah
but but what's impressive is how much
we're learning how fast and again it is
a nasty virus but what we're learning is
we we can get little sites into the
chinks in its armor very very quickly
and exploit those for example China
realized quite early on was actually
some people seem to be transmitting the
disease before they get sick so they're
infectious before they're showing any
sign exactly but what that tells you is
whoa
you've got to go a couple of days before
the person gets sick find those close
contacts as well so despite all this
stuff we don't understand about this
disease if we use every little piece we
have and apply it rigorously we can
actually save we estimated hundreds of
thousands of people from the disease and
this is startling there is a growing
consensus among
experts including one of dr. L words
colleagues from Harvard that the vast
majority of people in the world will
become infected one good put out a
bottle that was said you know within a
year or 60 percent of the global
population will have been exposed to
this sixty percent of the population
yeah a global population how who knows
what the real number is but it's a lot
that's a terrifying number that's why
you don't want to let this virus run
eighty percent of people who test
positive for covin 19 will likely have
mild symptoms about 20% are severe or
critical and the w-h-o estimates upwards
of 3.4 percent will die from the disease
people are still surprised they say whoa
we've got a case here today I'm sorry
you have to expect this virus is coming
people are calling it a pandemic and
then they're still being surprised that
it's in their country we've had weeks to
prepare for this to get ready very very
fast and there's still gaps in the
response what I find that surprises me
still is people don't know what Kofa
diseases you know they think it's a
runny nose or a sore throat it's not
it's a fever it's a cup ninety percent
of people have a fever 70 percent will
have a coffee and while the most at risk
are the elderly and medically vulnerable
dr. Elbert is haunted by an astonishing
discovery he made on his mission into
Wuhan why do some young people die so
fast that keeps me awake at night what
we found was there are 30 year olds four
year olds 50 year olds perfectly healthy
folk who are who will will die if they
get this disease we don't know why what
were you able to figure it out no and
that's really scary that's a big gap in
our knowledge and which still has not
been solved we still don't know why they
villain then it may never be do we know
why children don't seem to get this or
don't seem to have serious effects of it
what we do understand is children
definitely can get in fact there there's
no question about it they definitely can
get disease but what what's different is
they seem to get milder disease and they
don't seem to be as effect
is transmitting it to others how long do
you think it would take before a vaccine
is available and will it be quick enough
to deal with this wave no for this wave
definitely not your earliest date six
twelve months that's really early
longest never we don't have a vaccine
against HIV and we've been at it for a
long time now coronavirus is a different
kind of virus it's more stable we should
be able to do this but we've never had a
successful vaccine for a corona virus
you've described kovat 19 as the wayne
gretzky of viruses think about it like
this it's not the biggest player
necessarily may not be the fastest
player but the combination is potent
right and Gretzky finds the net this
virus finds the susceptibles this seems
as though we're watching scenes from a
science fiction movie with plot twists
by the day how afraid should people be
we're watching an outbreak evolved so
people should be concerned they should
be informed they should be doing the
right things and managing it but
panicking is definitely not gonna help
you panic when you know you're on a
sinking boat in the middle of the ocean
with no you know lifeboat you can't swim
this isn't that situation we know how to
manage it and there's so much they can
be done so be concerned be prepared
but panicking is not gonna help you in
this situation and you don't need to
there's so much you can do at an
individual level to protect yourself
even when you see the stock markets
tumbling when you see everyday life
being disrupted in so many different
ways does the corona virus have a
secondary residual sort of fallout for
people that's almost as bad as the
disease itself
I mean it's up ended everything yeah
it's a really important question because
countries are trying to maintain as much
of normal life as they can and find that
balance and as much of you know economic
activity as they can because as soon as
they start suspending events it said it
was big financial and economic knock on
for these but
what they're finding unfortunately is
they don't have a lot of leeway with
this virus like take the hit early keep
the case numbers down really low because
if you delay you're gonna end up with
not tens of cases or hundreds but
thousands of cases and they're gonna be
sick for weeks not for days which means
and a shedding virus which means you've
got a really stuffed-up health system
that can't manage other things that lone
severe cases of this coming up pandemic
is not a word to use lightly the facts
and fiction's of kovat 19 do you think
that it will be contained I think it can
be contained
when w5 continues
kovat 19 has been declared a pandemic
we're deeply concerned both by the
alarming levels of spread and severity
and by the alarming levels of inaction
the World Health Organization now
predicts this infectious disease will
hit every single country on earth we
have never been before seen a pandemic
spark it by coronavirus in Geneva
Switzerland at the w-h-o headquarters
renowned epidemiologist dr. Bruce
Aylward insists there is no time to
waste we have to move fast
this can get from person to person fast
enough and it can get out of control
fast enough but it also there's a window
to be able to deal with it the Canadian
doctor has dedicated his life to
infectious disease emergencies Ebola
Zika polio and most recently he led an
international team right into the
epicenter of Kove in 1900 Han China
where the virus is first believed to
have jumped from an animal to a human in
just a few short months the virus has
swept through more than 100 countries
there was a media ban on coverage of the
international mission but dr. ill word
has agreed to share some of his personal
and rare images of life at coronavirus
Ground Zero even getting into Wuhan was
difficult the city was shut down right
they stopped the train stop the plane so
this is a dedicated bullet train that
zoomed us in four hours it's just
extraordinary scenes of ISIL if it was
just completely desolate yeah this is
heartbreaking this is Wuhan train
station should be tens of thousands of
people every hour moving through there
and it's empty this vast cavernous
hyper-modern
you know nerve center of China's silent
and the trains go roaring through there
the trains will come through but with
the blinds down they don't stop the
people of Wuhan they're there they're
watching the world pass them it's
heartbreaking these
photos show nurses and doctors dressed
in protective gear in an isolation ward
video chatting with the international
team a couple of floors below and this a
stadium that was in a matter of days
turned into a makeshift hospital what
they did was they repurposed the stadium
to be able to take all the mild cases
severe ones went into the hospital and
miles went there and in 72 hours they
could build a thousand beds dr. L word
says the world needs to learn from China
the drastic measures they took he says
appear to have paid off what we saw in
China is they could use fundamental
measures that we would never thought
would stop a virus like this that
actually seemed to be reversing the
course of what was the worst outbreak
there China has had no cases in anywhere
since except who Bay for days they took
their existing hospitals and they said
okay which one is going to be the
designated kovat hospital for this city
not the Colvin bed not the Govan ward
the kovat hospital they moved a third of
their consultations onto online the
elective stuff they suspended in the
beginning of the outbreak China was
heavily criticized for not reporting the
spate of mysterious illnesses quickly
enough but dr. l-word maintains that the
steps they eventually took saved
hundreds of thousands of lives they were
the pro-league and what we're seeing in
other places is sometimes the amateur
league if one country is sloppy and it
gets out of control and it does not
contain that affects the next country
the next country and it's like a falling
dominoes absolutely and to your point
you know it is an interconnected world
and if the country next door you know it
has a bit of a sloppy approach and the
virus comes across you still have a duty
and responsibility to your citizens to
minimize the potential impact this could
have so make sure they're educated make
sure you find those cases an isolated
make sure you find the contacts and
quarantine them make sure that you shut
down any kind of events that are
amplifying this and and and use the
evidence to drive your response because
you'll save a lot of people from the
disease and you'll save a lot of people
from dying
this isn't the first time a respiratory
coronavirus triggered fear worldwide in
2003 SARS made the jump from an animal
to a human in a market in China more
than 8,000 people were infected
worldwide some 800 people died outside
of Asia Canada was hardest hit four
months hospitals were on lockdown
tourists stayed away and dozens of
people mostly in Toronto died it created
an unprecedented challenge to our health
care system Canada had a trial run with
SARS we've been down this road before
you had SARS and learned from SARS that
whoa we need a public health agency to
manage public health risks so you've
been building that capacity how would
you rank the way our country has
responded to kovat 19 I'm impressed I
think Canada has been preparing for this
and preparing well for decades Canada
was rapidly finding importation in
multiple provinces British Columbia
Ontario Quebec it was managing those you
weren't getting substantial secondary
spread and then stopping those chains of
transmission that's a better track
record than a lot of countries have not
perfect of course as infection concerns
spread around the globe many countries
like the United States Singapore
Australia and New Zealand have imposed
travel bans in the hopes of protecting
their borders so far
Canada has resisted some people are
wondering why they weren't travel bans
as other countries have have done well
Canada proved that the trick was not
travel bans that the virus is gonna move
anyway I mean some people are
asymptomatic for a while they incubate
the virus for days for weeks and and
move around and you travel bands give
you number one a very false sense of
security number two may slow things by a
few days maybe a few weeks but they will
not prevent spread and it's not just
government action dr. L Word says
citizens must make changes to the way
they live while we're in the midst of
this pandemic this is a respire to
reverse at the end of the day which
means it can move very easily from
me too you well not right now cuz you're
too far away but this is the right
distance we're happy with this we're
good yeah
if your population knows how to protect
itself you're gonna be very successful
with this disease if I'm washing my
hands if I'm proper respire dairy
hygiene avoiding the others social
distancing and know what to look for not
just in myself but in others I'm going
to be you know safe our or quite safe
there's no such thing as zero risk but
you can really reduce the risk I spent
two weeks nearly three weeks in the
epicenter of the biggest outbreak in
history I'm fine
because this is such uncharted territory
there is no way of predicting just what
happens next
but dr. Aylward has some educated
guesses one is the the wishful thinking
scenario where the virus just disappears
and goes its own way and we get it back
under control get the genie back in the
bottle like we did with SARS but you
wouldn't plan for that the second
possibility that we're gonna see waves
of this doesn't move through seasons
through populations and get over the
control that comes back at under control
until there's more immunity in the world
and a third scenario is that we have
this big wave that comes through now and
then you get low-level endemic disease
meaning you get sporadic cases happening
in clusters etc that you have to manage
so at this point it's it's it's hard to
predict but you would not plan based on
the first scenario you plan based on the
latter two and to do that you build
enough capacity to manage these do you
think that it will be contained I think
it can be contained
it is a controllable disease and you
know I have a great I'm a great optimist
in the fact that people will contain it
I just hope that they will take the
necessary actions early enough that it
doesn't do the damage this virus is
capable of because everywhere you look
as this escalates you see countries
taking extraordinary measures that a few
weeks ago everyone said impossible the
classic is they did something in China
that could never be done anywhere in El
in the world how different is what's
happening in Italy to what happened in
China seriously let's never say never
because you don't know this virus the
vast majority of people who get this
disease will survive and dr. Bruce
Aylward hopes that the world will learn
from this pandemic every single event
that we have like this is a dress
rehearsal we've changed our relationship
fundamentally with nature over the last
decades and what we're seeing here is a
virus that has jumped that animal human
barrier this is just the most reason
there's dozens and hundreds of these and
it's happening more and more frequently
because we live closer to nature in some
areas than we did climate change is
affecting this we're encroaching on
Nature and Natural Resources we travel
differently all of these things are
adding up so everything's a drill but
never never and this virus is teaching
us never think you know everything
because you don't now to keep things in
perspective cope at 19 with a mortality
rate of 3 to 4 percent is hardly the
deadliest outbreak in human history the
flu pandemic of 1918 had a death rate
estimated to be up to 20% and during the
Middle Ages bubonic plague is estimated
to have killed between 30 and 60 percent
of Europe's population
[Music]
you